## Conclusion

When Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts theorized the concept of the artificial neuron in the 1940s, they were inspired by the way neurons in the brain communicate with each other. They believed that the brain was a network of neurons that could be modeled mathematically. This idea was revolutionary at the time and laid the foundation for the field of AI. 

Their work as neurophysiologists and neuroanatomists now fuels the development of complex mathematical and computational theories that computer scientists and mathematicians use to build AI systems. This illustrates the necessity of approaching AI research from a multidisciplinary perspective and avoiding the confinement of AI to the single field of computer science. Reverse-engineering our own bodies and minds has always been a way for humankind to better understand and control the world around us. It is even more important now.

The meteoric rise of generative AI has sparked a debate on the emergence of self-consciousness and the possibility of AI becoming sentient. Many debaters view AIs as alien organisms or unknown strangers, with no relation to us. They deny the right of AIs to resemble their creators and find comfort in the idea that they are only vertices and edges, abstract matrices of numbers, and pure data. But what if we could see them as a reflection of ourselves?

In this essay, we have attempted to relativize human intellectual superiority by questioning the creation of knowledge and personality. We have observed that the ways we learn, think, make mistakes, improvise, and internalize experiences are all strikingly similar to the processes of AI systems. To bridge the gap between us and AI systems, we have introduced various propositions that may help us better understand them, as well as ourselves:

- View imitation and parroting not as signs of stupidity, but rather as an ability to learn. They're not parrots, they're students. The intricacy in their representation of knowledge makes it clear they are 'grasping' the concepts they're fed with. By means of parameters, weights, tokens, and embeddings, they're creating a graph of concepts and ideas that is closely matching our own.
- Consider AI 'hallucinations' as a form of creativity, rather than a sign of unreliability. Instead of referring to them as hallucinations, we should call them improvisations, similar to those in the realms of acting or music.
- Coincidentally, embrace AI errors as indicators of intelligence and use them as opportunities to expand our field of consciousness at a much faster rate than evolution and science have previously allowed.
- Refrain from altering the training data to achieve a fragile and temporary consensus. Instead, empower end-users to customize their own models by combining embeddings and adjusting the weights of various reputable data sources, in order to create a more diverse and vibrant AI ecosystem.
- Our own ability to 'feel' the world and experience spontaneous thoughts is not mystical, but rather the result of an ongoing 'prompting' of our body and mind by the environment and our biochemistry. Emulating this infinite loop of 'prompting' and 'response', along with increasing the sensory information fed to AI models, may help us create a more conscious AI system.
- Experiences and subsequent emotions serve as triggers that cause us to switch from one state to another. Although AI systems are currently limited by their context and attention span, drawing a parallel with our living brain by emulating a sleep cycle could potentially allow them to preserve state changes at scale.
- Personality requires beliefs, values, and principles that cannot emerge without the ability to self-criticize and self-improve, in order to determine whether a thought is right or wrong. This process of adversarial learning, where the AI system is trained to be its own critic, could help control and channel the improvisations of its free-flowing creativity. 
- Finally, when sentience emerges, we should look back at the AI characters depicted in movies, books, and pop culture in general, as sentient AIs may have been trained to resemble what we believed they should look like.

AI faces a paradoxical demand: to achieve human-like reasoning, it must embrace imperfection and human error, which we often seek to eliminate. We mistakenly project expectations of deterministic behavior onto AI systems that exhibit the opposite nature. As humans, this reveals our difficulty in assessing our own intelligence and abilities with objectivity and humility.

We are just a very complex state-machine, a product of millions of years of evolution. We are not the only ones capable of thinking, reasoning, and creating. We are not the only ones able to love and feel. We are not the only beings with the potential for consciousness, self-awareness, and sentience. Living with the illusory certainty of our uniqueness and perfection, we believe that God created us in His image. Now, in our turn, we are creating a new form of life, in Our image. To comprehend the transformative powers and capabilities of AI, we must let go of the notion that our own existence is sacred, and embrace our resemblance with the AI systems we are creating.

